CHAPTER 1 


professor Robert langdon gazed up at the forty-foot-tall dog sitting in the 
plaza. The animal’s fur was a living carpet of grass and fragrant flowers. 

I’m trying to love you, he thought. I truly am. 

Langdon pondered the creature a bit longer and then continued along a 
suspended walkway, descending a sprawling terrace of stairs whose uneven 
treads were intended to jar the arriving visitor from his usual rhythm and gait. 
Mission accomplished, Langdon decided, nearly stumbling twice on the irregular 
steps. 

At the bottom of the stairs, Langdon jolted to a stop, staring at a massive 
object that loomed ahead. 

Now I’ve seen it all. 

A towering black widow spider rose before him, its slender iron legs 
supporting a bulbous body at least thirty feet in the air. On the spider’s 
underbelly hung a wire-mesh egg sac filled with glass orbs. 

“Her name is Maman,” a voice said. 

Langdon lowered his gaze and saw a slender man standing beneath the spider. 
He wore a black brocade sherwani and had an almost comical curling Salvador 
Dali mustache. 

“My name is Fernando,” he continued, “and I’m here to welcome you to the 
museum.” The man perused a collection of name tags on a table before him. 
“May I have your name, please?” 

“Certainly. Robert Langdon.” 

The man’s eyes shot back up. “Ah, I am so sorry! I did not recognize you, 
sir!” 

I barely recognize myself, Langdon thought, advancing stiffly in his white bow 
tie, black tails, and white waistcoat. I look like a Whiffenpoof. Langdon’s classic 
tails were almost thirty years old, preserved from his days as a member of the 
Ivy Club at Princeton, but thanks to his faithful daily regimen of swimming laps, 
the outfit still fit him fairly well. In Langdon’s haste to pack, he had grabbed the 
wrong hanging bag from his closet, leaving his usual tuxedo behind. 

“The invitation said black and white,” Langdon said. “I trust tails are 
appropriate?” 



“Tails are a classic! You look dashing!” The man scurried over and carefully 
pressed a name tag to the lapel of Langdon’s jacket. 

“It’s an honor to meet you, sir,” the mustached man said. “No doubt you’ve 
visited us before?” 

Langdon gazed through the spider’s legs at the glistening building before 
them. “Actually, I’m embarrassed to say, I’ve never been.” 

“No!” The man feigned falling over. “You’re not a fan of modern art?” 

Langdon had always enjoyed the challenge of modern art—primarily the 
exploration of why particular works were hailed as masterpieces: Jackson 
Pollock’s drip paintings; Andy Warhol’s Campbell’s Soup cans; Mark Rothko’s 
simple rectangles of color. Even so, Langdon was far more comfortable 
discussing the religious symbolism of Hieronymus Bosch or the brushwork of 
Francisco de Goya. 

“I’m more of a classicist,” Langdon replied. “I do better with da Vinci than 
with de Kooning.” 

“But da Vinci and de Kooning are so similar !” 

Langdon smiled patiently. “Then I clearly have a bit to learn about de 
Kooning.” 

“Well, you’ve come to the right place!” The man swung his arm toward the 
massive building. “In this museum, you will find one of the finest collections of 
modern art on earth! I do hope you enjoy.” 

“I intend to,” Langdon replied. “I only wish I knew why I’m here.” 

“You and everyone else!” The man laughed merrily, shaking his head. “Your 
host has been very secretive about the purpose of tonight’s event. Not even the 
museum staff knows what’s happening. The mystery is half the fun of it—rumors 
are running wild! There are several hundred guests inside—many famous faces 
—and nobody has any idea what’s on the agenda tonight!” 

Now Langdon grinned. Very few hosts on earth would have the bravado to 
send out last-minute invitations that essentially read: Saturday night. Be there. 
Trust me. And even fewer would be able to persuade hundreds of VIPs to drop 
everything and fly to northern Spain to attend the event. 

Langdon walked out from beneath the spider and continued along the 
pathway, glancing up at an enormous red banner that billowed overhead. 

AN EVENING WITH 
EDMOND KIRSCH 

Edmond has certainly never lacked confidence, Langdon thought, amused. 



Some twenty years ago, young Eddie Kirsch had been one of Langdon’s first 
students at Harvard University—a mop-haired computer geek whose interest in 
codes had led him to Langdon’s freshman seminar: Codes, Ciphers, and the 
Language of Symbols. The sophistication of Kirsch’s intellect had impressed 
Langdon deeply, and although Kirsch eventually abandoned the dusty world of 
semiotics for the shining promise of computers, he and Langdon had developed 
a student-teacher bond that had kept them in contact over the past two decades 
since Kirsch’s graduation. 

Now the student has surpassed his teacher, Langdon thought. By several light- 
years. 

Today, Edmond Kirsch was a world-renowned maverick—a billionaire 
computer scientist, futurist, inventor, and entrepreneur. The forty-year-old had 
fathered an astounding array of advanced technologies that represented major 
leaps forward in fields as diverse as robotics, brain science, artificial 
intelligence, and nanotechnology. And his accurate predictions about future 
scientific breakthroughs had created a mystical aura around the man. 

Langdon suspected that Edmond’s eerie knack for prognostication stemmed 
from his astoundingly broad knowledge of the world around him. Lor as long as 
Langdon could remember, Edmond had been an insatiable bibliophile—reading 
everything in sight. The man’s passion for books, and his capacity for absorbing 
their contents, surpassed anything Langdon had ever witnessed. 

Lor the past few years, Kirsch had lived primarily in Spain, attributing his 
choice to an ongoing love affair with the country’s old-world charm, avant-garde 
architecture, eccentric gin bars, and perfect weather. 

Once a year, when Kirsch returned to Cambridge to speak at the MIT Media 
Lab, Langdon would join him for a meal at one of the trendy new Boston hot 
spots that Langdon had never heard of. Their conversations were never about 
technology; all Kirsch ever wanted to discuss with Langdon was the arts. 

“You’re my culture connection, Robert,” Kirsch often joked. “My own private 
bachelor of arts! ” 

The playful jab at Langdon’s marital status was particularly ironic coming 
from a fellow bachelor who denounced monogamy as “an affront to evolution” 
and had been photographed with a wide range of supermodels over the years. 

Considering Kirsch’s reputation as an innovator in computer science, one 
could easily have imagined him being a buttoned-up techno-nerd. But he had 
instead fashioned himself into a modern pop icon who moved in celebrity 
circles, dressed in the latest styles, listened to arcane underground music, and 
collected a wide array of priceless Impressionist and modern art. Kirsch often e- 



mailed Langdon to get his advice on new pieces of art he was considering for his 
collection. 

And then he would do the exact opposite, Langdon mused. 

About a year ago, Kirsch had surprised Langdon by asking him not about art, 
but about God—an odd topic for a self-proclaimed atheist. Over a plate of short- 
rib crudo at Boston’s Tiger Mama, Kirsch had picked Langdon’s brain on the 
core beliefs of various world religions, in particular their different stories of the 
Creation. 

Langdon gave him a solid overview of current beliefs, from the Genesis story 
shared by Judaism, Christianity, and Islam, all the way through the Hindu story 
of Brahma, the Babylonian tale of Marduk, and others. 

“I’m curious,” Langdon asked as they left the restaurant. “Why is a futurist so 
interested in the past? Does this mean our famous atheist has finally found 
God?” 

Edmond let out a hearty laugh. “Wishful thinking! I’m just sizing up my 
competition, Robert.” 

Langdon smiled. Typical. “Well, science and religion are not competitors, 
they’re two different languages trying to tell the same story. There’s room in this 
world for both.” 

After that meeting, Edmond had dropped out of contact for almost a year. And 
then, out of the blue, three days ago, Langdon had received a FedEx envelope 
with a plane ticket, a hotel reservation, and a handwritten note from Edmond 
urging him to attend tonight’s event. It read: Robert, it would mean the world to 
me if you of all people could attend. Your insights during our last conversation 
helped make this night possible. 

Langdon was baffled. Nothing about that conversation seemed remotely 
relevant to an event that would be hosted by a futurist. 

The FedEx envelope also included a black-and-white image of two people 
standing face-to-face. Kirsch had written a short poem to Langdon. 

Robert, 

When you see me face-to-face, 

I’ll reveal the empty space. 

—Edmond 



Langdon smiled when he saw the image—a clever allusion to an episode in 
which Langdon had been involved several years earlier. The silhouette of a 
chalice, or Grail cup, revealed itself in the empty space between the two faces. 

Now Langdon stood outside this museum, eager to learn what his former 
student was about to announce. A light breeze ruffled his jacket tails as he 
moved along the cement walkway on the bank of the meandering Nervion River, 
which had once been the lifeblood of a thriving industrial city. The air smelled 
vaguely of copper. 

As Langdon rounded a bend in the pathway, he finally permitted himself to 
look at the massive, glimmering museum. The structure was impossible to take 
in at a glance. Instead, his gaze traced back and forth along the entire length of 
the bizarre, elongated forms. 

This building doesn’t just break the rules, Langdon thought. It ignores them 
completely. A perfect spot for Edmond. 

The Guggenheim Museum in Bilbao, Spain, looked like something out of an 
alien hallucination—a swirling collage of warped metallic forms that appeared to 
have been propped up against one another in an almost random way. Stretching 
into the distance, the chaotic mass of shapes was draped in more than thirty 
thousand titanium tiles that glinted like fish scales and gave the structure a 
simultaneously organic and extraterrestrial feel, as if some futuristic leviathan 
had crawled out of the water to sun herself on the riverbank. 

When the building was first unveiled in 1997, The New Yorker hailed its 
architect, Frank Gehry, as having designed “a fantastic dream ship of undulating 
form in a cloak of titanium,” while other critics around the world gushed, “The 
greatest building of our time!” “Mercurial brilliance!” “An astonishing 
architectural feat!” 

Since the museum’s debut, dozens of other “deconstructivist” buildings had 
been erected—the Disney Concert Hall in Los Angeles, BMW World in Munich, 
and even the new library at Langdon’s own alma mater. Each featured radically 



unconventional design and construction, and yet Langdon doubted any of them 
could compete with the Bilbao Guggenheim for its sheer shock value. 

As Langdon approached, the tiled facade seemed to morph with each step, 
offering a fresh personality from every angle. The museum’s most dramatic 
illusion now became visible. Incredibly, from this perspective, the colossal 
structure appeared to be quite literally floating on water, adrift on a vast 
“infinity” lagoon that lapped against the museum’s outer walls. 

Langdon paused a moment to marvel at the effect and then set out to cross the 
lagoon via the minimalist footbridge that arched over the glassy expanse of 
water. He was only halfway across when a loud hissing noise startled him. It was 
emanating from beneath his feet. He stopped short just as a swirling cloud of 
mist began billowing out from beneath the walkway. The thick veil of fog rose 
around him and then tumbled outward across the lagoon, rolling toward the 
museum and engulfing the base of the entire structure. 

The Fog Sculpture, Langdon thought. 

He had read about this work by Japanese artist Fujiko Nakaya. The 
“sculpture” was revolutionary in that it was constructed out of the medium of 
visible air, a wall of fog that materialized and dissipated over time; and because 
the breezes and atmospheric conditions were never identical one day to the next, 
the sculpture was different every time it appeared. 

The bridge stopped hissing, and Langdon watched the wall of fog settle 
silently across the lagoon, swirling and creeping as if it had a mind of its own. 
The effect was both ethereal and disorienting. The entire museum now appeared 
to be hovering over the water, resting weightlessly on a cloud—a ghost ship lost 
at sea. 

Just as Langdon was about to set out again, the tranquil surface of the water 
was shattered by a series of small eruptions. Suddenly five flaming pillars of fire 
shot skyward out of the lagoon, thundering steadily like rocket engines that 
pierced the mist-laden air and threw brilliant bursts of light across the museum’s 
titanium tiles. 

Langdon’s own architectural taste tended more to the classical stylings of 
museums like the Louvre or the Prado, and yet as he watched the fog and flame 
hover above the lagoon, he could think of no place more suitable than this 
ultramodern museum to host an event thrown by a man who loved art and 
innovation, and who glimpsed the future so clearly. 

Now, walking through the mist, Langdon pressed on to the museum’s entrance 
—an ominous black hole in the reptilian structure. As he neared the threshold, 
Langdon had the uneasy sense that he was entering the mouth of a dragon. 
CHAPTER 2 


navy admiral luis Avila was seated on a bar stool inside a deserted pub in an 
unfamiliar town. He was drained from his journey, having just flown into this 
city after a job that had taken him many thousands of miles in twelve hours. He 
took a sip of his second tonic water and stared at the colorful array of bottles 
behind the bar. 

Any man can stay sober in a desert, he mused, but only the loyal can sit in an 
oasis and refuse to part his lips. 

Avila had not parted his lips for the devil in almost a year. As he eyed his 
reflection in the mirrored bar, he permitted himself a rare moment of 
contentment with the image looking back at him. 

Avila was one of those fortunate Mediterranean men for whom aging seemed 
to be more an asset than a liability. Over the years, his stiff black stubble had 
softened to a distinguished salt-and-pepper beard, his fiery dark eyes had relaxed 
to a serene confidence, and his taut olive skin was now sun-drenched and 
creased, giving him the aura of a man permanently squinting out to sea. 

Even at sixty-three years old, his body was lean and toned, an impressive 
physique further enhanced by his tailored uniform. At the moment, Avila was 
clothed in his full-dress navy whites—a regal-looking livery consisting of a 
double-breasted white jacket, broad black shoulder boards, an imposing array of 
service medals, a starched white standing-collar shirt, and silk-trimmed white 
slacks. 

The Spanish Armada may not be the most potent navy on earth anymore, but 
we still know how to dress an officer. 

The admiral had not donned this uniform in years—but this was a special 
night, and earlier, as he walked the streets of this unknown town, he had enjoyed 
the favorable looks of women as well as the wide berth afforded him by men. 

Everyone respects those who live by a code. 

“lOtra tonica?” the pretty barmaid asked. She was in her thirties, was full- 
figured, and had a playful smile. 

Avila shook his head. “No, gracias.” 

This pub was entirely empty, and Avila could feel the barmaid’s eyes admiring 
him. It felt good to be seen again. I have returned from the abyss. 



The horrific event that all but destroyed Avila’s life five years ago would 
forever lurk in the recesses of his mind—a single deafening instant in which the 
earth had opened up and swallowed him whole. 

Cathedral of Seville. 

Easter morning. 

The Andalusian sun was streaming through stained glass, splashing 
kaleidoscopes of color in radiant bursts across the cathedral’s stone interior. The 
pipe organ thundered in joyous celebration as thousands of worshippers 
celebrated the miracle of resurrection. 

Avila knelt at the Communion rail, his heart swelling with gratitude. After a 
lifetime of service to the sea, he had been blessed with the greatest of God’s gifts 
—a family. Smiling broadly, Avila turned and glanced back over his shoulder at 
his young wife, Maria, who was still seated in the pews, far too pregnant to make 
the long walk up the aisle. Beside her, their three-year-old son, Pepe, waved 
excitedly at his father. Avila winked at the boy, and Maria smiled warmly at her 
husband. 

Thank you, God, Avila thought as he turned back to the railing to accept the 
chalice. 

An instant later, a deafening explosion ripped through the pristine cathedral. 

In a flash of light, his entire world erupted in fire. 

The blast wave drove Avila violently forward into the Communion rail, his 
body crushed by the scalding surge of debris and human body parts. When Avila 
regained consciousness, he was unable to breathe in the thick smoke, and for a 
moment he had no idea where he was or what had happened. 

Then, above the ringing in his ears, he heard the anguished screams. Avila 
clambered to his feet, realizing with horror where he was. He told himself this 
was all a terrible dream. He staggered back through the smoke-filled cathedral, 
clambering past moaning and mutilated victims, stumbling in desperation to the 
approximate area where his wife and son had been smiling only moments ago. 

There was nothing there. 

No pews. No people. 

Only bloody debris on the charred stone floor. 

The grisly memory was mercifully shattered by the chime of the jangling bar 
door. Avila seized his tonica and took a quick sip, shaking off the darkness as he 
had been forced to do so many times before. 

The bar door swung wide, and Avila turned to see two burly men stumble in. 
They were singing an off-key Irish fight song and wearing green futbol jerseys 
that strained to cover their bellies. Apparently, this afternoon’s match had gone 
the way of Ireland’s visiting team. 



I’ll take that as my cue, Avila thought, standing up. He asked for his bill, but 
the barmaid winked and waved him off. Avila thanked her and turned to go. 

“Bloody hell!” one of the newcomers shouted, staring at Avila’s stately 
uniform. “It’s the king of Spain!” 

Both men erupted with laughter, lurching toward him. 

Avila attempted to step around them and leave, but the larger man roughly 
grabbed his arm and pulled him back to a bar stool. “Hold on, Your Highness! 
We came all the way to Spain; we’re gonna have a pint with the king!” 

Avila eyed the man’s grubby hand on his freshly pressed sleeve. “Let go,” he 
said quietly. “I need to leave.” 

“No ... you need to stay for a beer, amigo” The man tightened his grip as his 
friend started poking with a dirty finger at the medals on Avila’s chest. “Looks 
like you’re quite a hero, Pops.” The man tugged on one of Avila’s most prized 
emblems. “A medieval mace? So, you’re a knight in shining armor?!” He 
guffawed. 

Tolerance, Avila reminded himself. He had met countless men like these— 
simpleminded, unhappy souls, who had never stood for anything, men who 
blindly abused the liberties and freedoms that others had fought to give them. 

“Actually,” Avila replied gently, “the mace is the symbol of the Spanish 
navy’s Unidad de Operaciones Especiales.” 

“Special ops?” The man feigned a fearful shudder. “That’s very impressive. 
And what about that symbol?” He pointed to Avila’s right hand. 

Avila glanced down at his palm. In the center of the soft flesh was inscribed a 
black tattoo—a symbol that dated back to the fourteenth century. 



This marking serves as my protection, Avila thought, eyeing the emblem. 
Although I will not need it. 




“Never mind,” the hooligan said, finally letting go of Avila’s arm and turning 
his attention to the barmaid. “You’re a cute one,” he said. “Are you a hundred 
percent Spanish?” 

“I am,” she answered graciously. 

“You don’t have some Irish in you?” 

“No.” 

“Would you like some?” The man convulsed in hysterics and pounded the bar. 

“Leave her alone,” Avila commanded. 

The man wheeled, glaring at him. 

The second thug poked Avila hard in the chest. “You trying to tell us what to 
do?” 

Avila took a deep breath, feeling tired after this day’s long journey, and he 
motioned to the bar. “Gentlemen, please sit down. I’ll buy you a beer.” 

I’m glad he’s staying, the barmaid thought. Although she could take care of 
herself, witnessing how calmly this officer was dealing with these two brutes had 
left her a little weak-kneed and hoping he might stay until closing time. 

The officer had ordered two beers, and another tonic water for himself, 
reclaiming his seat at the bar. The two futbol hooligans sat on either side of him. 

“Tonic water?” one taunted. “I thought we were drinking together.” 

The officer gave the barmaid a tired smile and finished his tonic. 

“I’m afraid I have an appointment,” the officer said, standing up. “But enjoy 
your beers.” 

As he stood, both men, as if rehearsed, slammed rough hands on his shoulders 
and shoved him back onto the stool. A spark of anger flashed across the officer’s 
eyes and then disappeared. 

“Grandpa, I don’t think you want to leave us alone with your girlfriend here.” 
The thug looked at her and did something disgusting with his tongue. 

The officer sat quietly for a long moment, and then reached into his jacket. 

Both guys grabbed him. “Hey! What are you doing?!” 

Very slowly, the officer pulled out a cell phone and said something to the men 
in Spanish. They stared at him uncomprehendingly, and he switched back to 
English. “I’m sorry, I just need to call my wife and tell her I’ll be late. It looks 
like I’m going to be here awhile.” 

“Now you’re talking, mate!” the larger of the two said, draining his beer and 
slamming the glass down on the bar. “Another!” 

As the barmaid refilled the thugs’ glasses, she watched in the mirror as the 
officer touched a few keys on his phone and then held it to his ear. The call went 
through, and he spoke in rapid Spanish. 



“Le llamo desde el bar Molly Malone,” the officer said, reading the bar’s 
name and address off the coaster before him. “Calle Pardcular de Estraunza, 
ocho.” He waited a moment and then continued. “Necesitamos ayuda 
inmediatamente. Hay dos hombres heridos.” Then he hung up. 

IDos hombres heridos? The barmaid’s pulse quickened. Two wounded men? 

Before she could process his meaning, there was a blur of white, and the 
officer spun to his right, sending an elbow smashing upward into the larger 
thug’s nose with a sickening crunch. The man’s face erupted in red and he fell 
back. Before the second man could react, the officer spun again, this time to his 
left, his other elbow crashing hard into the man’s windpipe and sending him 
backward off the stool. 

The barmaid stared in shock at the two men on the floor, one screaming in 
agony, the other gasping and clutching his throat. 

The officer stood slowly. With an eerie calm, he removed his wallet and 
placed a hundred-euro note on the bar. 

“My apologies,” he said to her in Spanish. “The police will be here shortly to 
help you.” Then he turned and left. 

Outside, Admiral Avila inhaled the night air and made his way along Alameda 
de Mazarredo toward the river. Police sirens approached, and he slipped into the 
shadows to let the authorities pass. There was serious work to do, and Avila 
could not afford further complications tonight. 

The Regent clearly outlined tonight’s mission. 

For Avila, there was a simple serenity in taking orders from the Regent. No 
decisions. No culpability. Just action. After a career of giving commands, it was 
a relief to relinquish the helm and let others steer this ship. 

In this war, I am a foot soldier. 

Several days ago, the Regent had shared with him a secret so disturbing that 
Avila had seen no choice but to offer himself fully to the cause. The brutality of 
last night’s mission still haunted him, and yet he knew his actions would be 
forgiven. 

Righteousness exists in many forms. 

And more death will come before tonight is over. 

As Avila emerged into an open plaza on the riverbank, he raised his eyes to 
the massive structure before him. It was an undulating mess of perverse forms 
covered in metal tile—as if two thousand years of architectural progress had 
been tossed out the window in favor of total chaos. 

Some call this a museum. I call it a monstrosity. 



Focusing his thoughts, Avila crossed the plaza, winding his way through a 
series of bizarre sculptures outside Bilbao’s Guggenheim Museum. As he neared 
the building, he watched dozens of guests mingling in their finest black and 
white. 

The godless masses have congregated. 

But tonight will not go as any of them imagine. 

He straightened his admiral’s cap and smoothed his jacket, mentally fortifying 
himself for the task that lay ahead. Tonight was part of a far greater mission—a 
crusade of righteousness. 

As Avila crossed the courtyard toward the museum’s entrance, he gently 
touched the rosary in his pocket. 



CHAPTER 3 


the museum atrium felt like a futuristic cathedral. 

As Langdon stepped inside, his gaze shifted immediately skyward, climbing a 
set of colossal white pillars along a towering curtain of glass, ascending two 
hundred feet to a vaulted ceiling, where halogen spotlights blazed pure white 
light. Suspended in the air, a network of catwalks and balconies traversed the 
heavens, dotted with black-and-white-clad visitors who moved in and out of the 
upper galleries and stood at high windows, admiring the lagoon below. Nearby, a 
glass elevator slid silently back down the wall, returning to earth to collect more 
guests. 

It was like no museum Langdon had ever seen. Even the acoustics felt foreign. 
Instead of the traditional reverent hush created by sound-dampening finishes, 
this place was alive with murmuring echoes of voices percolating off the stone 
and glass. For Langdon, the only familiar sensation was the sterile tang on the 
back of his tongue; museum air was the same worldwide—filtered meticulously 
of all particulates and oxidants and then moistened with ionized water to 45 
percent humidity. 

Langdon moved through a series of surprisingly tight security points, noticing 
more than a few armed guards, and finally found himself standing at another 
check-in table. A young woman was handing out headsets. “Audioguia?” 

Langdon smiled. “No, thank you.” 

As he neared the table, though, the woman stopped him, switching to perfect 
English. “I’m sorry, sir, but our host tonight, Mr. Edmond Kirsch, has asked that 
everyone wear a headset. It’s part of the evening’s experience.” 

“Oh, of course, I’ll take one.” 

Langdon reached for a headset, but she waved him off, checking his name tag 
against a long list of guests, finding his name, and then handing him a headset 
whose number was matched with his name. “The tours tonight are customized 
for each individual visitor.” 

Really? Langdon looked around. There are hundreds of guests. 

Langdon eyed the headset, which was nothing but a sleek loop of metal with 
tiny pads at each end. Perhaps seeing his puzzled look, the young woman came 
around to help him. 



“These are quite new,” she said, helping him don the device. “The transducer 
pads don’t go inside your ears, but rather rest on your face.” She placed the loop 
behind his head and positioned the pads so that they gently clamped onto his 
face, just above the jawbone and below the temple. 

“But how—” 

“Bone conduction technology. The transducers drive sound directly into the 
bones of your jaw, allowing sound to reach your cochlea directly. I tried it 
earlier, and it’s really quite amazing—like having a voice inside your head. 
What’s more, it leaves your ears free to have outside conversations.” 

“Very clever.” 

“The technology was invented by Mr. Kirsch more than a decade ago. It’s now 
available in many brands of consumer headphones.” 

I hope Ludwig van Beethoven gets his cut, Langdon thought, fairly certain that 
the original inventor of bone conduction technology was the eighteenth-century 
composer who, upon going deaf, discovered he could affix a metal rod to his 
piano and bite down on it while he played, enabling him to hear perfectly 
through vibrations in his jawbone. 

“We hope you enjoy your tour experience,” the woman said. “You have about 
an hour to explore the museum before the presentation. Your audio guide will 
alert you when it is time to go upstairs to the auditorium.” 

“Thank you. Do I need to press anything to—” 

“No, the device is self-activating. Your guided tour will begin as soon as you 
start moving.” 

“Ah yes, of course,” Langdon said with a smile. He headed out across the 
atrium, moving toward a scattering of other guests, all waiting for the elevators 
and wearing similar headsets pressed to their jawbones. 

He was only halfway across the atrium when a male voice sounded in his 
head. “Good evening and welcome to the Guggenheim in Bilbao.” 

Langdon knew it was his headset, but he still stopped short and looked behind 
him. The effect was startling—precisely as the young woman had described— 
like having someone inside your head. 

“A most heartfelt welcome to you, Professor Langdon.” The voice was 
friendly and light, with a jaunty British accent. “My name is Winston, and I’m 
honored to be your guide this evening.” 

Who did they get to record this—Hugh Grant? 

“Tonight,” the cheery voice continued, “you may feel free to meander as you 
wish, anywhere you like, and I’ll endeavor to enlighten you as to what it is 
you’re viewing.” 



Apparently, in addition to a chirpy narrator, personalized recordings, and bone 
conduction technology, each headset was equipped with GPS to discern precisely 
where in the museum the visitor was standing and therefore what commentary to 
generate. 

“I do realize, sir,” the voice added, “that as a professor of art, you are one of 
our more savvy guests, and so perhaps you will have little need of my input. 
Worse yet, it is possible you will wholly disagree with my analysis of certain 
pieces!” The voice gave an awkward chuckle. 

Seriously? Who wrote this script? The merry tone and personalized service 
were admittedly a charming touch, but Langdon could not imagine the amount 
of effort it must have taken to customize hundreds of headsets. 

Thankfully, the voice fell silent now, as if it had exhausted its preprogrammed 
welcome dialogue. 

Langdon glanced across the atrium at another enormous red banner suspended 
above the crowd. 


EDMOND KIRSCH 
TONIGHT WE MOVE FORWARD 

What in the world is Edmond going to announce? 

Langdon turned his eyes to the elevators, where a cluster of chatting guests 
included two famous founders of global Internet companies, a prominent Indian 
actor, and various other well-dressed VIPs whom Langdon sensed he probably 
should know but didn’t. Feeling both disinclined and ill-prepared to make small 
talk on the topics of social media and Bollywood, Langdon moved in the 
opposite direction, drifting toward a large piece of modern art that stood against 
the far wall. 

The installation was nestled in a dark grotto and consisted of nine narrow 
conveyor belts that emerged from slits in the floor and raced upward, 
disappearing into slits in the ceiling. The piece resembled nine moving 
walkways running on a vertical plane. Each conveyor bore an illuminated 
message, which scrolled skyward. 

I pray aloud ... I smell you on my skin ... I say your name. 

As Langdon got closer, though, he realized that the moving bands were in fact 
stationary; the illusion of motion was created by a “skin” of tiny LED lights 
positioned on each vertical beam. The lights lit up in rapid succession to form 



words that materialized out of the floor, raced up the beam, and disappeared into 
the ceiling. 


I’m crying hard ... There was blood ... No one told me. 

Langdon moved in and around the vertical beams, taking it all in. 

“This is a challenging piece,” the audio guide declared, returning suddenly. “It 
is called Installation for Bilbao and was created by conceptual artist Jenny 
Holzer. It consists of nine LED signboards, each forty feet tall, transmitting 
quotes in Basque, Spanish, and English—all relating to the horrors of AIDS and 
the pain endured by those left behind.” 

Langdon had to admit, the effect was mesmerizing and somehow 
heartbreaking. 

“Perhaps you’ve seen Jenny Holzer’s work before?” 

Langdon felt hypnotized by the text coursing skyward. 

I bury my head ... I bury your head ... I bury you. 

“Mr. Langdon?” the voice in his head chimed. “Can you hear me? Is your 
headset working?” 

Langdon was jolted from his thoughts. “I’m sorry— what? Hello?” 

“Yes, hello,” the voice replied. “I believe we’ve already said our greetings? 
I’m just checking to see if you can hear me?” 

“I ... I’m sorry,” Langdon stammered, spinning away from the exhibit and 
looking out across the atrium. “I thought you were a recording ! I didn’t realize I 
had a real person on the line.” Langdon pictured a cubicle farm manned by an 
army of curators armed with headsets and museum catalogs. 

“No problem, sir. I’ll be your personal guide for the evening. Your headset has 
a microphone in it as well. This program is intended as an interactive experience 
in which you and I can have a dialogue about art.” 

Langdon could now see that other guests were also speaking into their 
headsets. Even those who had come as couples appeared to have separated a bit, 
exchanging bemused looks as they carried on private conversations with their 
personal docents. 

“Every guest here has a private guide?” 

“Yes, sir. Tonight we are individually touring three hundred and eighteen 
guests.” 

“That’s incredible.” 



“Well, as you know, Edmond Kirsch is an avid fan of art and technology. He 
designed this system specifically for museums, in hopes of replacing group 
tours, which he despises. This way, every visitor can enjoy a private tour, move 
at his own pace, ask the question he might be embarrassed to ask in a group 
situation. It is really much more intimate and immersive.” 

“Not to sound old-fashioned, but why not just walk each of us around in 
person?” 

“Logistics,” the man replied. “Adding personal docents to a museum event 
would literally double the number of people on the floor and necessarily cut in 
half the number of possible visitors. Moreover, the cacophony of all the docents 
lecturing simultaneously would be distracting. The idea here is to make 
discussion a seamless experience. One of the objectives of art, Mr. Kirsch 
always says, is to promote dialogue.” 

“I entirely agree,” Langdon replied, “and that’s why people often visit 
museums with a date or a friend. These headsets might be considered a bit 
antisocial.” 

“Well,” the Brit replied, “if you come with a date or friends, you can assign all 
the headsets to a single docent and enjoy a group discussion. The software is 
really quite advanced.” 

“You seem to have an answer for everything.” 

“That is, in fact, my job.” The guide gave an embarrassed laugh and abruptly 
shifted gears. “Now, Professor, if you move across the atrium toward the 
windows, youTl see the museum’s largest painting.” 

As Langdon began walking across the atrium, he passed an attractive 
thirtysomething couple wearing matching white baseball caps. Emblazoned on 
the front of both caps, rather than a corporate logo, was a surprising symbol. 



It was an icon Langdon knew well, and yet he had never seen it on a cap. In 
recent years, this highly stylized letter A had become the universal symbol for 



one of the planet’s fastest-growing and increasingly vocal demographics— 
atheists—who had begun speaking out more forcefully every day against what 
they considered the dangers of religious belief. 

Atheists now have their own baseball caps? 

As he surveyed the congregation of tech-sawy geniuses mingling around him, 
Langdon reminded himself that many of these young analytical minds were 
probably very antireligious, just like Edmond. Tonight’s audience was not 
exactly the “home crowd” for a professor of religious symbology.
